## Discussion

Protein sequences are more conserved than their underlying DNA sequence, allowing amino acid k-mer comparisons to match across larger evolutionary distances.
Protein sequence matching is also less impacted by sequencing errors due to codon degeneracy.
Our results show that amino acid k-mers can be used for global proteome comparisons, including estimation of sequence similarity (AAI) and taxonomic classification from either unassembled read datasets or assembled proteomes.

### k~aa~mer Containment comparisons enable alignment-free and assembly-free protein comparisons

As the majority of genome and proteome data is sequenced at the nucleotide level, comparisons of amino acid sequence are typically limited to assembly-based workflows, where a genome assembly has been translated into predicted Open Reading Frames (ORFs).
As amino acid k~aa~mers do not utilize any additional assembly information, we can also conduct comparisons directly from read datasets, bypassing assembly altogether.
In many cases, we are interested in comparing a novel sequencing dataset to one or more reference proteomes.
In this case, 6-frame translation of read sequences is sufficient for accurate comparisons to a k~aa~mer database generated from reference (assembled) proteome data [@mash_screen].
This method relies on the biological properties of k~aa~mers: not all potential k~aa~mers are represented in biological databases, particularly at longer k~aa~mer lengths such as k~aa7~ and k~aa10~ (info theory paper).
Containment comparisons allow us to focus only on the translated read k~aa~mers that match to the reference database, ignoring the 5/6ths of k~aa~mers that will originate from incorrect reading frames.
When using assembled genomes as a test case, our results show that this 6-frame translation method performs equally well when compared with generating k~aa~mers from the corresponding Prodigal-translated or RefSeq-downloaded proteomes.
By using only the k-mer containment estimate relative to reference proteomes, we can obtain accurate Amino Acid Identity estimates directly from DNA sequence.
In this way, we can use the more permissive nature of protein analyes for assembly-free genome and metagenome assignment and comparisons.
Of course, when both samples are proteomes that are equally trusted (e.g. neither set of protein k-mers is being 6-frame translated from genome sequence), then the average containment considers the entire set of protein sequence from both proteomes.

### k~aa10~ enables whole-proteome comparisons out to domain-level

Selection of k~aa~mer size is critical for the utility of these comparisons.
Longer k~aa~mer lengths (k~aa~=10) provide sufficient resolution for comparisons across taxonomic groups, including out to comparisons between genomes in different domains.
In contrast, shorter k~aa~mer lengths (k~aa~=7) are more likely to be shared across taxonomic groups, with the majority of unique k~aa7~mers shared across phyla within GTDB.
These k-mers lose resolution at wider evolutionary distances (<62% AAI), where insufficient k~aa~mers are unique to each taxonomic group to allow for taxonomic classification and robust similarity estimation via k~aa~mer containment.
However, this property can be advantageous for functional similarity estimation, where k~aa7~mers may provide the ability to match gene sequence even across wider evolutionary distances.
Indeed, this functionality has already begun to be explored, with k~aa7-mer functional annotation server [@kaamer].

### FracMinHash k~aa~-mer sketches support whole-proteome analysis at scale

All of the k~aa~mer methods described here function with all dataset k~aa~mers.
However, our results show that leveraging sketching methods such as FracMinHash and that retain as few as 5% of microbial proteome k-mers ($scaled=200$) maintains accuracy of k~aa~mer containment comparisons while reducing runtime, memory, and storage requirements.
Smaller proteomes such as viral proteomes and read-level or contig-level analysis may require different fractional scaling or different approach to ensure sufficient k~aa~mers for accurate comparisons.
While we have focused on FracMinHash sketching, these k~aa~mer comparisons can be used with any sketch that enables containment estimation.
Comparisons between sets of similar sizes or without 6-frame translation of protein k-mers can also use Jaccard to estimate $cAAI$, though Containment comparisons will always be as or more accurate than Jaccard comparisons [@koslicki_containment;@dk_fracminhash].

### $cAAI$ estimates Amino Acid Identity and Alignment Fraction

Amino Acid Identity (AAI) is a measure of average protein similarity between the homologous regions of two proteomes.
Traditional AAI methods use BLAST or BLAST-like alternatives to identify homologous fragments for comparison.
K-mer Jaccard and containment have been used for estimating average nucleotide identity between genomes [ @fan_AAF; @mash; @dk_fracminhash].
While several studies have proposed utilization of more complex evolutionary models [@doi:10.12688/f1000research.26930.1], an m-dependent model taking into account the non-independence of mutated k-mers is able to closely approximate alignment-based estimates of Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI) [@blanca;@dk_fracminhash].
Applying this same simple mutational model to amino acid k~aa~mer containment yields $cAAI$ values that strongly correlate with alignment-based AAI values.

For many alignment-based AAI approaches, it is important to report both the percent identity of matched regions and the fraction of the genomes that were mapped.
This prevents believing artificially high similarity values when only small fractions of the genomes overlap.
While alignment $AAI$ measure sequence similarity, $k~aa~mer containment, the fraction of shared dataset $k~aa~mers, is closer to a proxy for the fraction of shared proteome.
Indeed, $cAAI$ is strongly correlated with the alignment fraction reported by BLASTp AAI (as executed by EzAAI [@ezaai]), suggesting that $cAAI$ represents an aggregated similarity measure that encompasses both amino acid similarity and the fraction of shared protein sequence.
$K~aa~mer length selection remains critical, as discussed for direct k~aa~mer Containment comparisons.
while $k~aa7~ cAAI$ is more closely related to BLASTp values, k~aa~mer similarity saturates at distances greater than ~65% AAI.
While $cAAI~kaa10~$ are slightly offset from traditional $AAI$ values, k~aa10~ comparisons enable consistent whole-proteome similarity estimation even out to the widest evolutionary distances.
As with Average Nucleotide Identity comparisons, different AAI approaches vary slightly in the AAI reported for a given pair of proteomes, suggesting that comparisons are best made between values produced by the same method [@palmer_ani].

The majority of AAI estimation software has focused been alignment-based comparisons, which has limited comparisons at scale.
Larger-scale comparisons have leveraged similarity estimation across single-copy universally conserved genes [@miga].
A recent extension of this concept introduced $\widehat{AAI}$ which can use tetramer frequency of universal single-copy proteins to obtain an estimate of AAI.
Recent introduction of AAI proxy estimation via single-copy protein tetramers ($FastAAI)$ provides a promising alternative that enables AAI estimation for hundreds of thousands of comparisons [@fastaai].
FracMinHash k~aa~mer subsampling allows $cAAI$ to operate at a similar scale while encompassing information from across the whole proteome and allowing estimation directly from read datasets.
Whole proteome k~aa~mer comparisons average information across fast and slow-evolving genes, do not require prior selection of appropriate universal protein sets, and have the advantage of being assembly-agnostic.
However, speed of these comparisons depends on the FracMinHash k~aa~mer subsampling rate.

_For GTDB-wide comparisons, FracMinHash subsampling of XX% of k~aa~mers per proteome allowed XXX,XXX pairwise comparisons in XX time._
<!--
(to do: find maximal scaled value that maintains accuracy. Note that we may not want to use this scaled for fragmented/incomplete proteomes or for read datasets --test independently)
--->

### k~aa~mer Taxonomic Assignment is database-dependent

_(but protein helps with sensitivity + min-set-cov helps with specificity)_

<!---
discuss in relation to: Kaiju, CAT/BAT, MEGAN-prot, MMSeqs taxonomy (+ probably move some of this to intro)
--->

K-mer based taxonomic assignment relies upon matching k-mers found in previously sequenced reference proteomes.
While this approach will always be database-dependent and improved by presence of closely-related proteomes in the database, protein-based matching allows for classification at larger evolutionary distances.
While protein matching increases the sensitivity by matching across synonymous substitutions in the DNA sequence, classification LCA approaches often suffer from sensitivity/specificity trade-offs.
Here, the use of `sourmash gather` minimum set cover approach assigns each protein k-mer to its most likely/parsimonious match based on presence of other proteome k-mers present in the query genome/metagenome.

We expect classification at the amino acid level to be most useful for organisms not well represented in reference databases.
In these cases, the increased sensitivity of k~aa~mers can find any available similarity in the database.
While this similarity may not be sufficient to provide a species or even genus-level annotation, even higher-level taxonomic information can be useful when attempting to understand and classify novel metagenomic samples.

<!---
We expect classification at the amino acid level to be most useful for species with few representatives in published databases.
**distinguishing features this vs kaiju:**
min-set-cov - low false pos
fracminhash - faster, smaller databases (though might need to increase scaled value)
--->

### Limitations

While k~aa~mer containment allows protein analysis directly from DNA reads, it cannot be used for comparisons between two 6-frame translated datasets.
In this case, there is no way to distinguish between true biological k~aa~mers and noisy k~aa~mers introduced by translation into all potential open reading frames.
AAI is often most useful when comparing to known or assembled genomes, and does not have a direct application for comparisons between two unassembled metagenomic datasets.
If desired, it is possible to use a k~aa~mer Containment strategy to select the most likely translation frame for each read, which can be used for downstream analyses.
If instead, k~aa~mers are generated for each translation frame of each read separately, Containment comparisons can again be used to find the fraction of these k~aa~mers that can be matched to the k~aa~mers in the reference database.
The translation frame with the highest percent of matched k~aa~mers is most likely to be the coding frame for that read.
These strategy can also be used to predict non-coding reads, where few, if any, translated k~aa~mers match to reference database k~aa~mers.
This method works best when there are closely related organisms present in the reference database (@orpheum; @kaa_metapan).

### Future directions and utility

Here we have focused on k~aa~mer containment comparisons for whole-proteome comparisons, both for Amino Acid Identity estimation and Taxonomic Classification.
We anticipate k~aa~mer comparison methods will be especially useful for poorly sequenced environments where many organisms are not well represented in reference databases, where protein-level similarity to a common ancestor can result in classification to higher taxonomic ranks as needed.
Protein comparisons are also critical for sequence comparisons across polymorphic sequences, including viral proteome comparisons or metapangenome analysis [@kaa_metapan].
Both standard k~aa~mers and k~aa~mers generated from reduced amino acid alphabets can be used for a myriad of other applications as well, including functional annotation and clustering [@mash_screen;@kaamer;@snekmer], gene expression analyses, metapangenomics [@kaa_metapan], and single-cell eukaryotic transcriptomics [@orpheum].
FracMinHash k~aa~mer subsampling may be useful for a subset of these applications in order to allow analysis at scale without loss of accuracy.

<!--
Future directions/utility
- functional comparisons
- abundance comparisons with cosine, f_unique_weighted
- clustering at protein level
- While eukaryotic datasets are out of scope of this paper, these methods should work well 
k~aa~mers generated from reduced amino acid alphabets have already shown utility for functional analysis, clustering, and single-cell eukaryotic transcriptomics [@snekmer;@orpheum], and may prove useful for $cAAI$ comparisons in the future.
--->

<!--
Main points:
- Protein k-mers approximate proteomes
- FracMinHash sketches can be used for global proteome comparisons
- Longer protein k-mers can be used for taxonomic classification and metagenome breakdown
- maximum containment enables these things directly from DNA sequence

For many classification methods, an increase in sensitivity is accompanied by a concomitant decrease in specificity, yielding large number of false positives, often even on mock communities [@doi:10.3389/fmicb.2021.643682; @doi:10.1101/2022.01.31.478527].
-->

<!---
For groups not well represented in reference databases, assessing protein similarity can lead to classification at higher taxonomic ranks, such as phylum or family-level annotation. 
.. much better than nothing.

Protein k-mer containment analysis was demonstrated by Mash Screen [@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1841-x]
For both 6-frame translation applications,
 comparisons will be relative to a set of trusted reference proteomes.

 the most informative containment value will be be relative to the smaller set of k-mers (typically reference proteomes), rather than relative to all metagenome k-mers or all 6-frame translated genome or metagenome k-mers.

### Shared k-mers

K-mers shared at such a high level may be indicative of true shared biological sequence, contamination, or k-mer homoplasy: the presence of k-mers that are identical by chance rather than evolutionary descent. ](images/gtdb-rs202.lca_f_aggregated_kmers.png){#fig:gtdb-kmers height=2in}

This shared k-mers analysis is limited by the genomes included within GTDB. While some genera contain many thousands of genomes (e.g. 55k _Escherichia_ genomes), many others are limited to a single genome or pair of genomes. Thus here we do not consider the absolute numbers of shared k-mers, but rather the proportional differences between k-mer lengths.


**We chose to assess k=10 and k=7, because these ksizes mostly closely correspond to nucleotide k-mer 21, 31. k7 has also been previously used for database lookup (find paper + reference), but we didn't want to exclusively use it because so many 7-mers are shared across phyla. ** 

note 31, 51 --- maybe partially a result of database issues, e.g. not all species have multiple members; sometimes all members are closely related.



By leveraging the Containment Index of FracMinHash sketches with both nucleotide and protein k-mers, we can extend accurate k-mer sequence identity to sequences of different sizes and to >50% Amino Acid Identity.


Cricuolo [@doi:10.12688/f1000research.26930.1] (suggests w/ appropriate correction, nucl MinHash Jaccard can be used up to >65% ANI??)

Here, we utilize FracMinHash sketches with Containment to overcome size differences between sequences being compared. 

To accurately estimate sequence identity from sequence files of different sizes(genomes, metagenomes, etc), we employ FracMinhash sketches, which enables estimation of the Containment Index. 

While this method is still dependent on a good set of reference genomes, updating the set of references with new data does not require recalculation of discriminatory k=mer sets...

** discussion of k-mer size **

- FracMinhash distance estimation is robust to completeness
(unlike standard minhash https://drep.readthedocs.io/en/latest/choosing_parameters.html#importance-of-genome-completeness)


**containment** is imp:
Assembly methods can exclude up to XX% of data.


FracMinHash systematically subsamples amino acid k-mers, facilitating large-scale proteome comparisons.
For most microbes, fractional subsampling of 1/200 k-mers is sufficient for accurate distance estimation and taxonomic classification.


evolpath containment values --driven by the k-mer frequency patterns observed in gtdb db...
--->

<!---
A number of methods have used discriminatory k-mer analysis for taxonomic classification. However, most rely upon first developing a reference of discriminatory k-mers, e.g. k-mers unique to / diagnostic of a taxonomic group.
Instead, sourmash gather leverages the Containment Index to find the reference match that shares the largest number of k-mers with the query sequence.

Unlike many k-mer based classifiers, we do not need to explicitly characterize the discriminatory k-mers for each taxonomic group.
The Containment Index uses all matched k-mers between the query and each reference, finding the % of each reference genome present in the query.
Gather then selects the most covered (highest percent contained) reference genome, thus utilizing the combination of shared and discriminatory k-mers to find the most parsimonious match.
After finding the best match, all matched k-mers are removed for the query in order to repeat the analysis to find the next most parsimonious genome match.

FracMinHash sketches enable estimation of the Containment Index in addition to the more commonly used Jaccard Index. Unlike Jaccard comparisons, which estimate the similarity between sets, containment estimates are relative to each individual set. When both proteomes are equally trusted, the directional containment can be averaged, as done for BLAST-based AAI's(CITE?), which can differ depending on the direction of alignment. In contrast, when one set is highly trusted, such as a reference genome or proteome, the containment relative to that set may be most informative. 

--->

<!---
Differences between AAI values estimated via $\widehat{AAI}$ and $cAAI$ may reflect the differing information they compare -- universal gene similarity vs whole proteome k~aa~mer containment, and both may be useful for conducting proteome analyses at scale.


Below, we discuss amino acid k-mers and FracMinHash protein sketches for both assembly-based and assembly-free metagenomic analyses.

re: orpheum:  Although some data may be lost during the frame selection step, k~aa~mer Amino Acid Identity estimation may be feasible for comparisons between read datasets translated in this manner.

AAI doesn't really make sense for read <> read datasets.

<!---

(cite: also cite AAI comparison paper? Rodriguez?).

Now, compare with FastAAI -- whole proteome vs core genes
compare aith MiGa

There is one other method that can function at large scale: MIGA webserver (paper has 11,000 pairwise comparisons) -- and this method uses hAAI (heuristic AAI) across 110 single-copy universal genes, falling back to doing complete AAI if/wehn the hAAI cannot be estimated or is >= 90% ("close to saturation"). MiGA "applies a hierarchical approach: hAAI, AAI, then ANI" to identify the best match genome/proteome.
AAI thresholds have been proposed for higher taxonomic ranks, <45%, 45-65% and 65-95% for family, genus, and species [@doi:10.1016/j.mib.2007.08.006; @doi:10.1038/ismej.2017.113].

MiGA estimates AAI in pairs of genomes with hAAI below 90% as:
AAI_%≈100-e^(2.435076+0.4275193∙ln⁡(100-hAAI_%))


diffs vs fastaai:
- whole proteome
- taxonomy-agnostic
- 
Here we could envision doing this with protein k-mers doing a quick high-scaled proteome search to find the right family, then doing a more detailed DNA/genome analysis.
--->