## Methods

### Large-scale k-mer comparisons with FracMinHash sketches

FracMinHash sketching, as implemented in sourmash [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475838;@doi:10.12688/f1000research.19675.1;@doi:10.21105/joss.00027], is a MinHash variant that uses a scaling factor to subsample the unique k-mers in the dataset to the chosen fraction (1/`scaled`).
As k-mers are randomized prior to systematic subsampling, FracMinHash sketches are representative subsets that can be used for comparisons across datasets sketched with consistent k-mer lengths and scaling factors.

While FracMinHash sketches can be used to estimate both the Jaccard Index [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x] and Containment Index [@doi:10.1016/j.amc.2019.02.018], containment has been shown to permit more accurate estimation of genomic distance when genomes or datasets differ in size [@doi:10.1016/j.amc.2019.02.018;@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1875-0;@doi:10.1093/bib/bbz083;@doi:10.1101/2022.01.14.476226].
We focus here on the utility of containment comparisons for similarity estimation.
Containment comparisons are directional: the containment of genome A in sample B is the interection of k-mers in A and B divided by the k-mers in genome A (and vice versa).
Thus, two containment values can be estimated for a given pairwise comparison.
The choice of which containment value to use (or whether to average the two values) depends on the particular comparison.
FracMinHash containment has been shown to be an unbiased estimator of the true containment index, as long as the sketches contain sufficient k-mers for comparison or utilize a high-quality estimation of the true cardinality of the dataset [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475838;@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475870].

<!---
FracMinHash is a MinHash variant for selecting and hashing a set of representative k-mers from a sequence dataset [@sourmash_gather]. Unlike traditional MinHash, FracMinHash sketches scale with the size of the dataset, meaning each sketch is comprised of the chosen fraction of k-mers in the input dataset, rather than a chosen number of k-mers.
Downsampling sequencing datasets in this way enables estimation of the Containment Index, which has been shown to facilitate genome discovery and permit more accurate estimation of genomic distance, particularly for genomes of very different lengths [@koslicki_containment; @dashing; @mash_screen; @metalign].

_As of `v4.x`, `sourmash` sketches store a Hyper-Log-Log estimate of dataset cardinality, calculated during sketching. Use of this estimate ensures that `sourmash` FracMinHash containment results will be unbiased estimates of the true containment, even for very small genomes (e.g. viruses) or large scaling factors (e.g. keep 1/1e6 k-mers)._
--->

Sourmash supports sketching from either nucleotide or protein input sequence, to generate either nucleotide or protein FracMinHash sketches.
We generated nucleotide and protein sketches directly from genome and protome files, respectively.
All genome sequences were sketched with sourmash v4.2.1 using the `sourmash sketch dna` command, k-mer sizes of 21,31,51, a scaling factor of 1000.
All proteome sequences were sketched with sourmash v4.2.1 using the `sourmash sketch protein` command at protein k-sizes (_kaa-mer sizes?_) of 7-12 and a scaling factor of 200.
Sourmash also supports 6-frame translation of nucleotide sequence to amino acid sketches.
To assess the utility of these translated sketches, genome sequences were also sketched with the `sourmash sketch translate` command at protein k-sizes (_kaa-mer sizes?_) of 7-12 and a scaling factor of 200.

In select cases, we also conducted comparisons using all available k-mers, rather than using FracMinHash sketch subsampling.
While `sourmash` sketching is not optimized for this use case, we can generate these complete k-mer sketches using the same `sourmash` commands with a scaling factor of 1 (`scaled`=1).

### Anchor Containment analysis for protein comparisons directly from DNA sequence

For protein k-mer comparisons to be useful, any DNA queries must be translated into protein sequence.
This typically limits amino acid comparisons to assembly-based workflows, as assemblies can be reliably translated into predicted Open Reading Frames (ORFs).
With k-mer methods, we can utilize direct 6-frame translation, which is assembly-free but does not attempt to find the correct open reading frame.
Assuming a single open reading frame, only ~1/6th of the k-mers generated by 6-frame translation will belong to true ORFs.
The remaining erroneous k-mers greatly impact the Jaccard Index (set similarity) when comparing samples, but only impact the containment index in one direction (relative to the 6-frame translated set).
The containment estimate relative to reference proteomes will be an accurate comparison directly from DNA sequence.
We term this "anchor" containment, where the trusted genome is the "anchor" upon which we base the comparison.
Since 6-frame translation should always yield excess k-mers relative to genomes of similar size, this desired containment will generally be the larger of the two containment values (maximum containment).

To facilitate these comparisons within `sourmash`, we have implemented "maximum containment," a shorthand method to select the greater of the two containment values. The maximum containment method may also provide advantages for genomes with potential contamination, as containment will always be relative to the smaller, and presumably less contaminated, genome. However, highly incomplete genomes may overestimate similarity with this method, so we suggest using containment relative to the more trusted sample if known, or considering both containment values when comparing two genomes of approximately equal quality.
Note that comparing two 6-frame translated datasets is not recommended, as there is no mechanism to exclude erroneous k-mers introduced during translation.

### Estimating Average Amino Acid Identity

MinHash Sketch Jaccard has been shown to correlate well with ANI at high sequence identities (>=90% sequence identity) [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x].
Recently, Blanca et al, 2021 [@doi:10.1101/2021.01.15.426881] presented a method to increase the accuracy of sequence similarity estimation from MinHash Jaccard by recognizing that k-mers generated from mutated sequence are not independent.
Hera et al, 2022 [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475870] extended this approach to estimate sequence identity from FracMinHash Containment estimates.
Each of these methods assumes a simple mutational model, with equal substitution probability for each nucleotide, and then estimates sequence identity based on k-mer comparisons.
Here, we note that there is nothing unique to nucleotide sequence included in these equations.
By applying the same equations to comparisons between amino acid k-mer sketches, we can estimate average Amino Acid Identity (AAI) between proteomes.
For this application, we maintain the assumption of a simple mutational model of equal substitution probability at each position, but recognize that it now applies to any amino acid, rather than any nucleotide.

The debiased Fractional Containment Index is an unbiased estimator of the true containment index $C(A,B)$.

{% raw %}
```{=latex}
\begin{equation}
{C_\text{frac}(A,B)}= \frac{\vert \mathbf{FRAC}_s(A) \cap \mathbf{FRAC}_s(B)\vert }{\vert \mathbf{FRAC}_s(A)\vert \left(1-(1-s)^{\vert A\vert}\right)} \mathbbm{1}_{\vert \mathbf{FRAC}_s(A) \vert>0}
\end{equation}
```
{% endraw %}


The equation for sequence similarity estimation (ANI or AAI) from FracMinHash Containment is reproduced here for completeness.
See [@dk_fracminhash] for these and other analytical details.

### Immplementation of ANI and AAI estimation

We provide an implementation of Fractional Containment to average sequence identity (ANI/AAI) in the software package `sourmash`, which is implemented in Python and Rust and developed under the BSD license [@sourmash_f1000;@sourmash_joss].
ANI and AAI values can be reported from sequence comparisons
The distance estimation equations can be found in the `distance_utils.py` file and ANI/AAI values can be reported from a variety of `sourmash` comparison and search commands as of version `4.4`.
sourmash is available at [github.com/sourmash-bio/sourmash](https://github.com/sourmash-bio/sourmash/).
The results in this paper were generated with sourmash v4.4.1.

### FracMinHash Amino Acid Identity Correlates with Alignment-based Methods

To assess whether k-mer methods can be used to approximate AAI, we ran generated alignment AAI values for each pairwise comparison using methods that leverage different mapping algorithms: EzAAIb (BLASTp), EzAAIm (MMSeqs2), and CompareM (DIAMOND). As BLAST-based alignment remains the gold-standard method, we compare all AAI values the BLAST AAI values.

EzAAI v1.12 [@doi:10.1007/s12275-021-1154-0] was used to run BLAST-based and MMSeqs-based Amino Acid Identity. The EzAAI workflow begins with PRODIGAL-based translation of genome sequence [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.3176], followed by reciprocal BLAST [@blast] or MMSeqs2 [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3988] alignment. For both, we utilized EzAAI default parameters: 40% coverage threshold, 40% sequence identity threshold.
CompareM v0.1.2 ([@url:https://github.com/dparks1134/CompareM]; run with `--sensitive` parameter for DIAMOND mapping) was used to obtain Average Amino Acid Identity between the anchor proteome and each additional proteome in its evolutionary path.
CompareM reports the mean and standard deviation of AAI, as well as the fraction of orthologous genes upon which this estimate is based.
Briefly, CompareM calls genes for each genome or proteome using PRODIGAL [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.3176] and conducts reciprocal best-hit mapping via DIAMOND [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-119].
By default, CompareM requires at least 30% percent sequence identity and 70% percent alignment length to identify orthologous genes.
As DIAMOND alignment-based homology identification may correlate less well with BLAST-based homology under 60% sequence identity [@url:https://rodriguez-r.com/blog/aai-blast-vs-diamond/], **we also ran compareM with a percent sequence identity threshold of 60% to obtain a set of high-confidence orthologous genes for AAI estimation. We report correlation between FracMinHash AAI estimation and each of these compareM parameter sets in XX _(TBD)_**. _CompareM was also used to obtain AAI values directly from each genome, using PRODIGAL to translate sequences prior to gene calling. These results [were not significantly different from proteome-based AAI estimation??] (Supplemental XX)._

### Taxonomic Classification with Sourmash `Gather` and `Taxonomy`

To take advantage of the increased evolutionary distance comparisons offered by protein k-mers, we apply compositional analysis with sourmash gather [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475838] to protein sequences (amino acid input and 6-frame translation from nucleotides).
Sourmash gather is conducted in two parts: first (preselection), gather searches the query against all reference genomes, building all genomes with matches into a smaller, in-memory database for use in step 2.
Second (decomposition), gather does iterative best-containment decomposition, where query k-mers are iteratively assigned to the reference genome with best containment match.
In this way, gather reports the minimal list of reference genomes that contain all of the k-mers that matched any reference in the database.
For queries with high sequence identity (ANI) to reference matches, we classify the query sequence as a member of the reference taxonomic group, as in [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475838].
However, when ANI between the query and the top reference match exceeds the taxonomic rank threshold (e.g. species default 95%), we use a least/lowest common ancestor (LCA) approach to report likely taxonomy at a higher taxonomic rank.
Briefly, as gather reports non-overlapping genome matches, we can sum the k-mer matches for all genomes with shared taxonomies at the next higher taxonomic rank to report the best query containment at that rank.
As this gather-LCA approach first uniquely assigns k-mers to their best reference genome, it bypasses the impact of increasing database size on taxonomic assignment observed for other LCA-based k-mer classification approaches [@doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1554-6].

These taxonomic utilities are implemented in the `sourmash taxonomy` module, and classifications were run on gather output via `sourmash tax genome`.


### Workflows and Computing Resources

Reproducible workflows associated with this paper are available at https://github.com/bluegenes/2022-protein-kmers-workflow (ADD DOI for release), with datasets available at OSF (XX). All workflows were executed using snakemake >= 5.26 [@doi:10.12688/f1000research.29032.1)] on the FARM cluster at UC Davis, using practices outlined in [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giaa140].


<!---
Unused

Sourmash contains standard implementations of Jaccard Index [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x] and Containment Index [@doi:10.1016/j.amc.2019.02.018] set comparisons.

**Estimating Sequence Similarity from Jaccard**
For a comparison between two genomes (genomeA, genomeB), the Jaccard Index represents the k-mers shared between the two genomes (sketch intersection) divided by the k-mers present in both sketches (sketch union).
Thus the Jaccard Index represents the percent of shared k-mers relative to all k-mers across both genomes (intersection/genomeA+genomeB).

Alignment-based ANI/AAI represents the sequence similarity of the alignable fraction of two genomes. In this way, ANI/AAI only compares the shared sequences, and discounts/ignores all other sequence present in either genome.
Bidirectional containment comparisons use the same numerator (shared k-mers), but may contain different numbers of non-shared k-mers in the denominator.

`sourmash` contains standard implementations of Jaccard Index [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x] and Containment Index [@doi:10.1016/j.amc.2019.02.018] set comparisons.

Unlike traditional MinHash sketches, FracMinHash sketches enable similarity estimation with containment, in addition to commonly used Jaccard comparisons.

Containment is directional: while the number of shared k-mers is fixed for a pairwise comparison, the Containment of each dataset will depend on the unique k-mers found in that particular dataset. Containment for genomeA will be (intersection/genomeA), while Containment for genomeB will be (intersection/genomeB).

Recently, two methods have been proposed to increase the accuracy and range of sequence similarity estimation from MinHash Jaccard: Blanca et al, 2021 [@doi:10.1101/2021.01.15.426881] maintain the use of a simple mutational model, but recognize that k-mers generated from mutated sequence are not independent, while Criscuolo 2021 atempts to better account for the distribution of nucleotides present in a sequence

 that estimate ANI while accounting for the nonindependence of mutated k-mers .


 By accounting for the non-independence of mutated k-mers, 

Recently, Blanca et al, 2021 [@doi:10.1101/2021.01.15.426881] developed

maintain the use of a simple mutational model, but recognize that k-mers generated from mutated sequence are not independent, while Criscuolo 2021 atempts to better account for the distribution of nucleotides present in a sequence.

Following the approach o

 while Criscuolo 2021 modified the mutational model [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07641-9].
In 

estimate the mutation rate between MinHash sketches while accounting for the non-independence of mutated k-mers.




While [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07641-9] attempts to improve ANI estimation by modifying the simple model...

; (>=80% sequence identity [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07641-9]



- Average containment
- Anchor containment
- Max containment
: In pairwise comparisons between genomes, if both genomes are known to be high-quality (highly complete and not contaminated), both containment values are useful. In contrast, when one genome is high quality and the comparison genome is unknown, containment relative to the trusted reference genome may be more informative. For comparisons between datasets of extremely different sizes, such as the application of metagenome breakdown, contain

The Containment Index instead represents the percent of a genome found in the comparison genome.
**Estimating Sequence Similarity from Containment**

In cases where both genomes are high-quality and highly complete, we can most closely approximate ANI by using the average value between the bidirectional containment values.

max containment: that is, using the comparison that represents the shared sequence over the genome with the smallest number of non-shared k-mers.

In cases where one genome is more trusted (high quality and highly complete), Containment may be best calculated relative to the trusted genome.

This use case also allows us to estimate sequence identity from larger sequence collections, such as metagenomes.
By definition, metagenomes contain k-mers from many organisms.
We can take advantage of directional Containment by calculating the Containment Index of Reference genomes that share many k-mers with the Metagenome.
We have already shown the utility of Containment for metagenome classification [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.11.475838], but now we can report estimated average sequence identity between the matching sequence regions and the reference genome.


FastANI v1.32 ([@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07641-9]; run with default parameters)  was used to obtain Average Nucleotide Identity between the anchor genome and each additional genome in its evolutionary path.
FastANI is targeted at ANI values between 80%-100%, so only values in this range are considered "trusted" and used in **assessing the correlation between FracMinHash estimates and FastANI._(TBD)_**
--->





